“Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long talk with the
harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly disturbed in mind. In
twenty-four hours he was attacked by a fever, and died three days
afterwards. We performed the usual burial service, and he is at his
rest, sewn up in his hammock with a thirty-six-pound shot at his head
and his heels, off El Giglio island. We bring to his widow his sword and
cross of honor. It was worth while, truly,” added the young man with a
melancholy smile, “to make war against the English for ten years, and to
die in his bed at last, like everybody else.”

“Why, you see, Edmond,” replied the owner, who appeared more comforted
at every moment, “we are all mortal, and the old must make way for the
young. If not, why, there would be no promotion; and since you assure me
that the cargo——”

“Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise you
not to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage.”

Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young man shouted:
“Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib; brail up the spanker!”

The order was executed as promptly as it would have been on board a man-
of-war.

“Let go—and clue up!” At this last command all the sails were lowered,
and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly onwards.

“Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, observing the
owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, M. Danglars, coming out of
his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me, I must
look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.”

The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized a rope which
Dantès flung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit to
a sailor, climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man, going to
his task, left the conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the
owner. He was a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of
unprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors, insolent to
his subordinates; and this, in addition to his position as responsible
agent on board, which is always obnoxious to the sailors, made him as
much disliked by the crew as Edmond Dantès was beloved by them.

“Well, M. Morrel,” said Danglars, “you have heard of the misfortune that
has befallen us?”

“Yes—yes: poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and an honest man.”

“And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service,
as became a man charged with the interests of a house so important as
that of Morrel & Son,” replied Danglars.

“But,” replied the owner, glancing after Dantès, who was watching the
anchoring of his vessel, “it seems to me that a sailor needs not be so
old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business, for our friend
Edmond seems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction
from anyone.”

“Yes,” said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming with hate. “Yes,
he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. Scarcely was the
captain’s breath out of his body when he assumed the command without
consulting anyone, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the
Island of Elba, instead of making for Marseilles direct.”

Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing the young men
together. “Ah, ha!” said he, “I hope all is over, explained and
settled.”

“Yes,” said Beauchamp; “the absurd reports have died away, and should
they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose them; so let us speak no
more of it.”

“Albert will tell you,” replied the count “that I gave him the same
advice. Look,” added he. “I am finishing the most execrable morning’s
work.”

“What is it?” said Albert; “arranging your papers, apparently.”

“My papers, thank God, no,—my papers are all in capital order, because I
have none; but M. Cavalcanti’s.”

“M. Cavalcanti’s?” asked Beauchamp.

“Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the count is
introducing?” said Morcerf.

“Let us not misunderstand each other,” replied Monte Cristo; “I
introduce no one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti.”

“And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marry Mademoiselle
Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly.”

“What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?” asked
Beauchamp.

“Certainly! do you come from the end of the world?” said Monte Cristo;
“you, a journalist, the husband of renown? It is the talk of all Paris.”

“And you, count, have made this match?” asked Beauchamp.

“I? Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report. I make a
match? No, you do not know me; I have done all in my power to oppose
it.”

“Ah, I understand,” said Beauchamp, “on our friend Albert’s account.”

“On my account?” said the young man; “oh, no, indeed, the count will do
me the justice to assert that I have, on the contrary, always entreated
him to break off my engagement, and happily it is ended. The count
pretends I have not him to thank;—so be it—I will erect an altar Deo
ignoto.”

“Listen,” said Monte Cristo; “I have had little to do with it, for I am
at variance both with the father-in-law and the young man; there is only
Mademoiselle Eugénie, who appears but little charmed with the thoughts
of matrimony, and who, seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her
to renounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for me.”

“And do you say this wedding is at hand?”

“Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know the young man; he
is said to be of good family and rich, but I never trust to vague
assertions. I have warned M. Danglars of it till I am tired, but he is
fascinated with his Luccanese. I have even informed him of a
circumstance I consider very serious; the young man was either charmed
by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, I scarcely know
which. But I do know his father lost sight of him for more than ten
years; what he did during these ten years, God only knows. Well, all
that was useless. They have commissioned me to write to the major to
demand papers, and here they are. I send them, but like Pilate—washing
my hands.”

“And what does Mademoiselle d’Armilly say to you for robbing her of her
pupil?”

“Oh, well, I don’t know; but I understand that she is going to Italy.
Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for the
impresari; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle Theatre,
who is under some obligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you
look dull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with Mademoiselle
Eugénie?”

“I am not aware of it,” said Albert, smiling sorrowfully. Beauchamp
turned to look at some paintings.

“But,” continued Monte Cristo, “you are not in your usual spirits?”

“I have a dreadful headache,” said Albert.

“Well, my dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo, “I have an infallible
remedy to propose to you.”

“What is that?” asked the young man.

“A change.”

“Indeed?” said Albert.

“Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall go from home.
Shall we go together?”

“You annoyed, count?” said Beauchamp; “and by what?”

“Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see you with a brief
preparing in your house.”

“What brief?”

“The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiable assassin—some
brigand escaped from the gallows apparently.”

“True,” said Beauchamp; “I saw it in the paper. Who is this Caderousse?”

“Some Provençal, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles,
and M. Danglars recollects having seen him. Consequently, the procureur
is very active in the affair, and the prefect of police very much
interested; and, thanks to that interest, for which I am very grateful,
they send me all the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under
pretence of their being Caderousse’s murderers, so that in three months,
if this continues, every robber and assassin in France will have the
plan of my house at his fingers’ ends. I am resolved to desert them and
go to some remote corner of the earth, and shall be happy if you will
accompany me, viscount.”

“Willingly.”

“Then it is settled?”

“Yes, but where?”

“I have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound soothes,
where one is sure to be humbled, however proud may be his nature. I love
that humiliation, I, who am master of the universe, as was Augustus.”

“But where are you really going?”

“To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor. I was rocked when an infant
in the arms of old Ocean, and on the bosom of the beautiful Amphitrite;
I have sported with the green mantle of the one and the azure robe of
the other; I love the sea as a mistress, and pine if I do not often see
her.”

“Let us go, count.”

“To sea?”

“Yes.”

“You accept my proposal?”

“I do.”

“Well, viscount, there will be in my courtyard this evening a good
travelling britzka, with four post-horses, in which one may rest as in a
bed. M. Beauchamp, it holds four very well, will you accompany us?”

“Thank you, I have just returned from sea.”

“What? you have been to sea?”

“Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the Borromean Islands18.”

“What of that? come with us,” said Albert.

“No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing is impossible.
Besides, it is important,” added he in a low tone, “that I should remain
in Paris just now to watch the paper.”

“Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend,” said Albert; “yes, you are
right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to discover the enemy who made
this disclosure.”

Albert and Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands expressing
what their tongues could not before a stranger.

“Beauchamp is a worthy fellow,” said Monte Cristo, when the journalist
was gone; “is he not, Albert?”

“Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly. But now we are
alone,—although it is immaterial to me,—where are we going?”

“Into Normandy, if you like.”

“Delightful; shall we be quite retired? have no society, no neighbors?”

“Our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with, and a fishing-
boat.”

“Exactly what I wish for; I will apprise my mother of my intention, and
return to you.”

“But shall you be allowed to go into Normandy?”

“I may go where I please.”

“Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you in Italy—but to
accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?”

“You forget, count, that I have often told you of the deep interest my
mother takes in you.”

“‘Woman is fickle.’ said Francis I.; ‘woman is like a wave of the sea,’
said Shakespeare; both the great king and the great poet ought to have
known woman’s nature well.”

“Woman’s, yes; my mother is not woman, but a woman.”

“As I am only a humble foreigner, you must pardon me if I do not
understand all the subtle refinements of your language.”

“What I mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to give her
confidence, but when she does she never changes.”

“Ah, yes, indeed,” said Monte Cristo with a sigh; “and do you think she
is in the least interested in me?”

“I repeat it, you must really be a very strange and superior man, for my
mother is so absorbed by the interest you have excited, that when I am
with her she speaks of no one else.”

“And does she try to make you dislike me?”

“On the contrary, she often says, ‘Morcerf, I believe the count has a
noble nature; try to gain his esteem.’”

“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, sighing.

“You see, then,” said Albert, “that instead of opposing, she will
encourage me.”

“Adieu, then, until five o’clock; be punctual, and we shall arrive at
twelve or one.”

“At Tréport?”

“Yes; or in the neighborhood.”

“But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?”

“Easily,” said Monte Cristo.

“You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpass the
railway, which would not be very difficult in France, but even the
telegraph.”

“But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less than seven
or eight hours, do not keep me waiting.”

“Do not fear, I have little to prepare.”

Monte Cristo smiled as he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment
absorbed in deep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead as
if to dispel his reverie, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered.

“Bertuccio,” said he, “I intend going this evening to Normandy, instead
of tomorrow or the next day. You will have sufficient time before five
o’clock; despatch a messenger to apprise the grooms at the first
station. M. de Morcerf will accompany me.”

Bertuccio obeyed and despatched a courier to Pontoise to say the
travelling-carriage would arrive at six o’clock. From Pontoise another
express was sent to the next stage, and in six hours all the horses
stationed on the road were ready.

Before his departure, the count went to Haydée’s apartments, told her
his intention, and resigned everything to her care.

Albert was punctual. The journey soon became interesting from its
rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previous idea.

“Truly,” said Monte Cristo, “with your post-horses going at the rate of
two leagues an hour, and that absurd law that one traveller shall not
pass another without permission, so that an invalid or ill-tempered
traveller may detain those who are well and active, it is impossible to
move; I escape this annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and
horses; do I not, Ali?”

The count put his head out of the window and whistled, and the horses
appeared to fly. The carriage rolled with a thundering noise over the
pavement, and everyone turned to notice the dazzling meteor. Ali,
smiling, repeated the sound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and
spurred his horses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze. This
child of the desert was in his element, and with his black face and
sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust he raised, like the genius
of the simoom and the god of the hurricane.

“I never knew till now the delight of speed,” said Morcerf, and the last
cloud disappeared from his brow; “but where the devil do you get such
horses? Are they made to order?”

“Precisely,” said the count; “six years since I bought a horse in
Hungary remarkable for its swiftness. The thirty-two that we shall use
tonight are its progeny; they are all entirely black, with the exception
of a star upon the forehead.”

“That is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count, with all these
horses?”

“You see, I travel with them.”

“But you are not always travelling.”

“When I no longer require them, Bertuccio will sell them, and he expects
to realize thirty or forty thousand francs by the sale.”

“But no monarch in Europe will be wealthy enough to purchase them.”

“Then he will sell them to some Eastern vizier, who will empty his
coffers to purchase them, and refill them by applying the bastinado to
his subjects.”

“Count, may I suggest one idea to you?”

“Certainly.”

“It is that, next to you, Bertuccio must be the richest gentleman in
Europe.”

“You are mistaken, viscount; I believe he has not a franc in his
possession.”

“Then he must be a wonder. My dear count, if you tell me many more
marvellous things, I warn you I shall not believe them.”

“I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tell me, why does
a steward rob his master?”

“Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love of
robbing.”

“You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family, and ambitious
desires for himself and them. Also because he is not sure of always
retaining his situation, and wishes to provide for the future. Now, M.
Bertuccio is alone in the world; he uses my property without accounting
for the use he makes of it; he is sure never to leave my service.”

“Why?”

“Because I should never get a better.”

“Probabilities are deceptive.”

“But I deal in certainties; he is the best servant over whom one has the
power of life and death.”

“Do you possess that right over Bertuccio?”

“Yes.”

There are words which close a conversation with an iron door; such was
the count’s “yes.”

The whole journey was performed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two
horses, dispersed over seven stages, brought them to their destination
in eight hours. At midnight they arrived at the gate of a beautiful
park. The porter was in attendance; he had been apprised by the groom of
the last stage of the count’s approach. At half past two in the morning
Morcerf was conducted to his apartments, where a bath and supper were
prepared. The servant who had travelled at the back of the carriage
waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front, attended the count.

Albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. All night he was lulled
by the melancholy noise of the surf. On rising, he went to his window,
which opened on a terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a
pretty park bounded by a small forest.

In a creek lay a little sloop, with a narrow keel and high masts,
bearing on its flag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain or, on a
sea azure, with a cross gules in chief which might be an allusion to his
name that recalled Calvary, the mount rendered by our Lord’s passion
more precious than gold, and to the degrading cross which his blood had
rendered holy; or it might be some personal remembrance of suffering and
regeneration buried in the night of this mysterious personage’s pas
life.

On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town of
Meung, in which the author of ROMANCE OF THE ROSE was born, appeared to
be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the Huguenots had just made
a second La Rochelle of it. Many citizens, seeing the women flying
toward the High Street, leaving their children crying at the open doors,
hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain
courage with a musket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the
hostelry of the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing
every minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.

In those times panics were common, and few days passed without some city
or other registering in its archives an event of this kind. There were
nobles, who made war against each other; there was the king, who made
war against the cardinal; there was Spain, which made war against the
king. Then, in addition to these concealed or public, secret or open
wars, there were robbers, mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels,
who made war upon everybody. The citizens always took up arms readily
against thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or
Huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the cardinal or
Spain. It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Monday
of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing neither
the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de Richelieu,
rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller. When arrived there, the
cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.

A young man--we can sketch his portrait at a dash. Imagine to yourself a
Don Quixote of eighteen; a Don Quixote without his corselet, without his
coat of mail, without his cuisses; a Don Quixote clothed in a woolen
doublet, the blue color of which had faded into a nameless shade between
lees of wine and a heavenly azure; face long and brown; high cheek
bones, a sign of sagacity; the maxillary muscles enormously developed,
an infallible sign by which a Gascon may always be detected, even
without his cap--and our young man wore a cap set off with a sort of
feather; the eye open and intelligent; the nose hooked, but finely
chiseled. Too big for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced
eye might have taken him for a farmer’s son upon a journey had it not
been for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric, hit
against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against the rough side
of his steed when he was on horseback.

For our young man had a steed which was the observed of all observers.
It was a Bearn pony, from twelve to fourteen years old, yellow in his
hide, without a hair in his tail, but not without windgalls on his legs,
which, though going with his head lower than his knees, rendering a
martingale quite unnecessary, contrived nevertheless to perform his
eight leagues a day. Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so
well concealed under his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable
gait, that at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, the
appearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung--which place he had entered
about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate of Beaugency--produced an
unfavorable feeling, which extended to his rider.

And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young
d’Artagnan--for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinante
named--from his not being able to conceal from himself the ridiculous
appearance that such a steed gave him, good horseman as he was. He had
sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting the gift of the pony from M.
d’Artagnan the elder. He was not ignorant that such a beast was worth at
least twenty livres; and the words which had accompanied the present
were above all price.

“My son,” said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure Bearn PATOIS of
which Henry IV could never rid himself, “this horse was born in the
house of your father about thirteen years ago, and has remained in it
ever since, which ought to make you love it. Never sell it; allow it to
die tranquilly and honorably of old age, and if you make a campaign with
it, take as much care of it as you would of an old servant. At court,
provided you have ever the honor to go there,” continued M. d’Artagnan
the elder, “--an honor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives
you the right--sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has been
worthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both for your
own sake and the sake of those who belong to you. By the latter I mean
your relatives and friends. Endure nothing from anyone except Monsieur
the Cardinal and the king. It is by his courage, please observe, by his
courage alone, that a gentleman can make his way nowadays. Whoever
hesitates for a second perhaps allows the bait to escape which during
that exact second fortune held out to him. You are young. You ought to
be brave for two reasons: the first is that you are a Gascon, and the
second is that you are my son. Never fear quarrels, but seek adventures.
I have taught you how to handle a sword; you have thews of iron, a wrist
of steel. Fight on all occasions. Fight the more for duels being
forbidden, since consequently there is twice as much courage in
fighting. I have nothing to give you, my son, but fifteen crowns, my
horse, and the counsels you have just heard. Your mother will add to
them a recipe for a certain balsam, which she had from a Bohemian and
which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach
the heart. Take advantage of all, and live happily and long. I have but
one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--not mine, for
I myself have never appeared at court, and have only taken part in
religious wars as a volunteer; I speak of Monsieur de Treville, who was
formerly my neighbor, and who had the honor to be, as a child, the
play-fellow of our king, Louis XIII, whom God preserve! Sometimes their
play degenerated into battles, and in these battles the king was not
always the stronger. The blows which he received increased greatly his
esteem and friendship for Monsieur de Treville. Afterward, Monsieur de
Treville fought with others: in his first journey to Paris, five times;
from the death of the late king till the young one came of age, without
reckoning wars and sieges, seven times; and from that date up to the
present day, a hundred times, perhaps! So that in spite of edicts,
ordinances, and decrees, there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is
to say, chief of a legion of Caesars, whom the king holds in great
esteem and whom the cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is
said. Still further, Monsieur de Treville gains ten thousand crowns a
year; he is therefore a great noble. He began as you begin. Go to him
with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may do as he
has done.”

Athos had invented the phrase, family affair. A family affair was not
subject to the investigation of the cardinal; a family affair concerned
nobody. People might employ themselves in a family affair before all the
world. Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.

Aramis had discovered the idea, the lackeys.

Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.

D’Artagnan alone had discovered nothing--he, ordinarily the most
inventive of the four; but it must be also said that the very name of
Milady paralyzed him.

Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser for his diamond.

The breakfast at M. de Treville’s was as gay and cheerful as possible.
D’Artagnan already wore his uniform--for being nearly of the same size
as Aramis, and as Aramis was so liberally paid by the publisher who
purchased his poem as to allow him to buy everything double, he sold his
friend a complete outfit.

D’Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he had not
constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon.

After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet again in the
evening at Athos’s lodging, and there finish their plans.

D’Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer’s uniform in every
street of the camp.

In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met. There only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to Milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at Tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

Everyone offered his own. Athos talked of the discretion of Grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. Porthos
boasted of the strength of Mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. Finally, d’Artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of Boulogne.

These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

“Unfortunately,” said Athos, “he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united.”

“But where is such a lackey to be found?”

“Not to be found!” cried Athos. “I know it well, so take Grimaud.”

“Take Mousqueton.”

“Take Bazin.”

“Take Planchet. Planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four.”

“Gentlemen,” said Aramis, “the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best.”

“What Aramis says is very sensible,” replied Athos; “we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. Monsieur Abbe,
you are a great moralist.”

“Doubtless,” said Aramis, “for we not only require to be well served in
order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail; for in case of failure,
heads are in question, not for our lackeys--”

“Speak lower, Aramis,” said Athos.

“That’s wise--not for the lackeys,” resumed Aramis, “but for the
master--for the masters, we may say. Are our lackeys sufficiently
devoted to us to risk their lives for us? No.”

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan. “I would almost answer for Planchet.”

“Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good sum of
money, and then, instead of answering for him once, answer for him
twice.”

“Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same,” said Athos, who was
an optimist when things were concerned, and a pessimist when men were in
question. “They will promise everything for the sake of the money, and
on the road fear will prevent them from acting. Once taken, they will be
pressed; when pressed, they will confess everything. What the devil! we
are not children. To reach England”--Athos lowered his voice--“all
France, covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal, must be
crossed. A passport for embarkation must be obtained; and the party must
be acquainted with English in order to ask the way to London. Really, I
think the thing very difficult.”

“Not at all,” cried d’Artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be
accomplished; “on the contrary, I think it very easy. It would be, no
doubt, parbleu, if we write to Lord de Winter about affairs of vast
importance, of the horrors of the cardinal--”

“Speak lower!” said Athos.

“--of intrigues and secrets of state,” continued d’Artagnan, complying
with the recommendation. “There can be no doubt we would all be broken
on the wheel; but for God’s sake, do not forget, as you yourself said,
Athos, that we only write to him concerning a family affair; that we
only write to him to entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he
will put it out of her power to injure us. I will write to him, then,
nearly in these terms.”

“Let us see,” said Athos, assuming in advance a critical look.

“Monsieur and dear friend--”

“Ah, yes! Dear friend to an Englishman,” interrupted Athos; “well
commenced! Bravo, d’Artagnan! Only with that word you would be quartered
instead of being broken on the wheel.”

“Well, perhaps. I will say, then, Monsieur, quite short.”

“You may even say, My Lord,” replied Athos, who stickled for propriety.

“My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of the Luxembourg?”

“Good, the Luxembourg! One might believe this is an allusion to the
queen-mother! That’s ingenious,” said Athos.

“Well, then, we will put simply, My Lord, do you remember a certain
little enclosure where your life was spared?”

“My dear d’Artagnan, you will never make anything but a very bad
secretary. Where your life was spared! For shame! that’s unworthy. A man
of spirit is not to be reminded of such services. A benefit reproached
is an offense committed.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, “you are insupportable. If the letter must
be written under your censure, my faith, I renounce the task.”

“And you will do right. Handle the musket and the sword, my dear fellow.
You will come off splendidly at those two exercises; but pass the pen
over to Monsieur Abbe. That’s his province.”

“Ay, ay!” said Porthos; “pass the pen to Aramis, who writes theses in
Latin.”

“Well, so be it,” said d’Artagnan. “Draw up this note for us, Aramis;
but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short, for I shall prune you in
my turn, I warn you.”

“I ask no better,” said Aramis, with that ingenious air of confidence
which every poet has in himself; “but let me be properly acquainted with
the subject. I have heard here and there that this sister-in-law was a
hussy. I have obtained proof of it by listening to her conversation with
the cardinal.”

“Lower! SACRE BLEU!” said Athos.

“But,” continued Aramis, “the details escape me.”

“And me also,” said Porthos.

D’Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time in silence. At
length Athos, after serious reflection and becoming more pale than
usual, made a sign of assent to d’Artagnan, who by it understood he was
at liberty to speak.

“Well, this is what you have to say,” said d’Artagnan: “My Lord, your
sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished to have you killed that
she might inherit your wealth; but she could not marry your brother,
being already married in France, and having been--” d’Artagnan stopped,
as if seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.

“Repudiated by her husband,” said Athos.

“Because she had been branded,” continued d’Artagnan.

“Bah!” cried Porthos. “Impossible! What do you say--that she wanted to
have her brother-in-law killed?”

“Yes.”

“She was married?” asked Aramis.

“Yes.”

“And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”
cried Porthos.

“Yes.”

These three yeses had been pronounced by Athos, each with a sadder
intonation.

“And who has seen this fleur-de-lis?” inquired Aramis.

“d’Artagnan and I. Or rather, to observe the chronological order, I and
d’Artagnan,” replied Athos.

“And does the husband of this frightful creature still live?” said
Aramis.

“He still lives.”

“Are you quite sure of it?”

“I am he.”

There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyone was affected
according to his nature.

“This time,” said Athos, first breaking the silence, “d’Artagnan has
given us an excellent program, and the letter must be written at once.”

“The devil! You are right, Athos,” said Aramis; “and it is a rather
difficult matter. The chancellor himself would be puzzled how to write
such a letter, and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very
readily. Never mind! Be silent, I will write.”
